In this video, we'll learn
how the class member access
modifiers work with inheritance.
We'll also learn about the protected
class member access modifier.
We've already seen the public
and private class member access
modifiers, and we know how they work.
While c++ provides a third
access modifier named protected.
We define protected data
members and methods exactly
as we do public and private.
We provide the protected
keyword followed by a colon
within the class declaration.
All data and method declarations
that follow the protected block
will have protected access.
So protected class members
are accessible to all
methods of the class itself.
Protected class members are also
accessible by any derived classes that
have been derived from the base class.
However, protected class members
act like private members.
So they're not accessible directly
from objects of either the base
class or of the derived class.
So you can see the protected
class members act very much like
private class members unless
there's inheritance involved.
Let's see the syntax once more
so we can discuss exactly what's
available to the derived class.
Here you can see that we have a base
class and that base class has public,
protected and private class members.
We'll use three integers: a b
and c each within a different
access modifier to understand how
inheritance works with access
modifiers in the next few slides.
Since c++ provides three types
of inheritance, we have to
look at each type individually
since the access depends on the
type of inheritance involved.
In the case of public inheritance,
public class members are
inherited, and they're also
public in the drive class.
Protected class members are
inherited, and they're also
protected in the drive class.
Finally, private class members are
also inherited, however, the derived
class does not have access to them.
Any attempt to access base class
private class members from the derived
class will result in a compiler error.
This is the most common form
of inheritance used in c++.
You can see that the rules make sense.
Public is public.
Protected is protected, which
means that no matter how deep
the class hierarchy goes, the
protected class members will be
accessible by all derived classes.
Finally, something marked as
private in the base class implies
that the developer of the base
class doesn't want to grant
access to those class members.
Now let's look at
protected inheritance.
Remember, this is
not is a inheritance.
The public-based class members are
protected in the derived class.
Protected base class members are
And private-based class members are
not accessible from the drive class.
Finally, let's look at
private inheritance.
Again, private inheritance
is not is a inheritance.
So in the case of private
inheritance, the base class public
and protected class members are
private in the derived class, and
the private class members are not
accessible from the drive class.
This may seem confusing and
a lot to remember, but it's
really a very logical approach
to inheriting class members.
As mentioned previously, inheritance
in c++ is a very complex topic.
We'll concentrate on single
public inheritance in this course.
Now let's head over to the ide
and walk through an example,
using access modifiers and
public inheritance and live code.
Okay, so I'm in the IDE.
I'm in the section 15 workspace in the
ProtectedMembersClassAccess project.
And what I've got here is a real
simple class similar to the one
that we created on the slides
where I've got a base class
that I'm declaring right here.
And it's got a public integer
a, which I'm initializing to
0 and a method called display.
I've also got a protected integer
b and a private integer c,
both of them initialized to 0.
Now the first thing we'll look at
is this line right here, line 11.
Obviously, member methods have access
to everything in the class, so there's
no problem here accessing a b or c
regardless of their access modifier.
So this will be just fine.
Something else I wanted to note
was that if we have a friend of
this base class, right, a friend
function or a friend class.
Then we'll have access to
public protected and private
information in this class.
Okay, so let's look at this
first at the object level before
we even get into inheritance.
Here we have a base class.
Why don't we create a base object,
and it's right here on line 31, I'm
creating an object called base and
its class is base right up here.
Okay, we've got those
three integers: a b and c.
Now let's access them all.
So let's say base.a is 100,
base.b is 200, and base.c is 300.
Now what do we expect?
Well, we've been through this
before with public and private.
The only difference here is protected.
We expect base.a to be okay, right.
It's public in base, so the
objects have access to it.
And we expect base.c to
give us a compiler error,
right because it's private.
We don't have access to
private data from our objects.
This is nothing new.
This is what we've learned all along.
Now there is no inheritance in here,
right, because we're only dealing
with that base class right now.
There's no derived class yet here.
So in this case, I also expect the
compiler error because as far as the
compiler is concerned, the protected
and private access modifiers really
are the same when it comes to objects.
So this object base has no
business messing with b or
c because they're protected
and the other one is private.
So if I compile this -- if i try to
build and run this, I should get two
compiler errors and you can see them
right there on the red arrows right
here: one says b is protected and the
other one should say c is private.
Okay, so that makes sense, right.
That's working with objects.
So let me comment these two
lines, and we'll move on now.
Okay, so now let's
talk about inheritance.
Right here we're create -- we've
got our base class just as before.
Now I'm creating a derived class.
I'm deriving this class
publicly from base.
So I'm inheriting everything in
base and I'm using those rules that
we saw with public inheritance.
So a is public in my parent,
so it's public in me.
B is protected in my parent,
so it's protected in me.
C is private in my parent, so I
inherit it, but it is not accessible.
Okay, so it's important to understand
that c is indeed inherited, and we'll
look at that when we walk through
the debugger when we step through it.
You just don't have access
to it from within derived.
It makes sense that it's part of
you since it is part of your parent.
Okay, so now what do
we have access to here.
Well, we should have access to a
and b, right, within our derived.
We should not have access to c.
So why don't we write a
real simple method here.
We'll just call it void access
base members, let's say,
and this won't do anything.
We'll just access those things and
see when we get compiler errors.
So we're going to say a equals
100, let's say, right here.
Now again, we expect this to
be okay because a is public in
my parent, it's public and me.
We also expect b equals 200 to
be okay because it's protected in
my parent, it's protected in me.
This is a member function.
It's got access to it.
This is the problem here.
If I say c is 300,
c is not accessible.
So we expect a compiler error here.
Okay, again, remember c is there.
If you need to access c or modify c,
you can't do it directly from derived.
You'll have to go through some
getter function or setter function
provided in the base class, but
we'll talk about that later.
So let's compile this now, and
we expect to get a compiler error
right there on line 28, and that's
exactly what happens, right.
C is not accessible.
So you can see how these rules apply.
Now I'll comment that out.
And we'll do one last thing
is we'll come down here now.
And remember, so what we did was
we created base object and tried
to access those three data members.
Then we created a derived class
and saw what the access was here.
Now we're going to do it from a
derived object, so let's do that.
Let's say derived, let's just call
it d, and we'll do the same thing.
We'll say d.a is 100, d.b
is 200 and d.c is 300.
Okay, so take a look at a.
I'm accessing the a data
member in the derived class.
Well, let's move up
here just a little bit.
A is going to be public, so
i should expect that to work.
But look in b and c,
protected and not accessible.
I don't have access to protected data,
and I certainly don't have access
to something that's not accessible.
So we expect this line to be okay,
and we expect both of these to
give us compiler errors right here.
All right, so let's give
this a build and run.
And there you see
everything else is clean.
I'll scroll up just a little bit.
And there you can see
the compiler errors.
And it says just like you would
expect, this is protected in this
context, and this guy is -- oops
sorry, I forgot a semicolon, let
me do that one more time, make sure
we get the right compiler errors.
There we go.
So we still got the same two
compiler errors, but there
are different errors now.
So in this case, b is protected,
so we don't have access to it.
And down here, c is private, so we
certainly, don't have access to it.
Okay, all right, So that's really what
I wanted to show you in this video.
You can see that this makes sense.
All these protected data members
will be inherited, inherit, inherited
all the way down the hierarchy so
you've got access to them throughout.
Okay, so the last thing I want to
do is I want to put a break point
right here on line 42, right, where
we're creating that derived object d.
And I want to debug this and
step through it, mainly just so
we can see what d looks like.
Okay, so I'm right there at line 42.
I'm going to step, and I've
just created that object.
And let's refresh this over here.
And first, let's look at base.
Our base object, which you
can see right here on line
36, has an a b and a c in it,
that's exactly what we expect.
B and c are 0, and a is 100
because I set that to 100 on line
37, as you can see right here.
Okay, but now what about
the derived object.
What would you expect that
to look like internally.
Well, it is a base, right, because
we're using public inheritance.
You expect a b and c to be in there,
and that's exactly what you have.
There's your base part,
and there's a b and c.
So that derived object d
has a base object within it.
It seems obvious right, but a
lot of students get this confused
because of that one rule that says
private elements are not accessible.
Somehow they sometimes think that
not accessible means you didn't
inherit it, and that's not the case.
You can see, it's really here, right.
You can see that that c is there.
It has to be there since
you are one of your parents.
So we're not deleting stuff.
We're not disinheriting stuff.
So we're getting
everything from our parent.
So just because we don't have access
to, it doesn't mean it's not there.
I wanted to be really clear
on that because I see students
misunderstanding that a lot.
All right, so in the next video,
we'll talk about constructors and
destructors and the order that
stuff happens in with inheritance.